> [!NOTE]
As this is an overview, most of the info here wasn't compiled on one date; it is a collection of thoughts from different times. This is meant to be an overview, not a detailed thought process, so the info here might be much more up to date than the date suggests. 

# Toastium
For a while now, my dream project has been an operating system. I am not sure why, but there is just something so cool about writing everything yourself and knowing how everything works. I've wanted to learn GPU rendering for a while, as it gave me a lot of power and understanding, and the ability to do a lot, and this is almost the next logical step in that. Creating my own OS would give me a deep understanding of everything and the ability to do much more on computers and understand them better. 

## The goal
Originally, the goal for this project was to get it running for a custom handheld portable game console that my friend and I are making. Although this is a planned target, I decided it would be best to make it not the main target, so a more regular desktop would allow for more future possibilities, as I wouldn't shoot myself in the foot by missing something. It was also not guaranteed that I would be able to do this project, so I felt, for the time being, that I should plan to run Linux on the console and use this OS if it gets far enough along.    

With that said, what is the goal???   
I honestly don't really have one for this project; it's just about doing as much as I wanna do and learning everything I can. It would be quite cool to get a desktop running where you get GUIs for apps, so I suppose that is an end goal, but again, it will just change with time, like as I reach that next milestone, it might be networking, then a better file system, etc. 

## technical specs
For picking an architecture, I decided on RISC-V. The reason for this is the more simplestic nature of it, it being a lot simpler meant I was more likely to actually get this project happening, and if I later wanted to port to another arch, such as x86 or arm, I could always change my code to support it, this mean that a goal with this os was coding as much as i can not OS spesfic so i can change to add support at a later date.    
Because of the above reason, the os will be designed with portability in mind so its architecture-specific stuff compresses down to generic function calls so it can be swapped out fairly easily. 

# POSIX compatibility

If the OS is POSIX, I decided to follow the majority of POSIX while making some changes.   
Everything is a file: I decided to scrap this. Personally, I am not a fan, and I feel it makes stuff messy.  
I also made changes to the IPC types.  
 - Pipe: one-way send, one-way receive.
 - Socket: uses global IPC access system. It's one that receives many processes sent.
 - Caster: uses global IPC access system. It's one send, many receive. The latest data will be stored in kernel in ring buffer. Each process keeps track of where it is up to in reading this. It also supports having size of 1 where it acts as a shareable value/state. 
 - Shared Memory: Not really an IPC, but it operates pretty similarly in practise. Will be made up of hosts, a host can make more hosts and remove itself. A host can make children who can do whatever but can't share or edit control. A shared memory is dropped when all hosts have dropped it doesn't matter if children have it or not. 
 - File Handle: Again, not really IPC, but close. Basically, get the file path, and you get a handler you can use and only you. Lockless atm, will likely revisit. 

global IPC access system: Each IPC type that uses this will have the following standard 'access/path/to/parent/executable:<ipc_id>'. The idea here is that anyone can access it, and instead of reserving a name, you ask the executable itself for it. 

If data is accessed on request, it can be done via a Caster with length one fairly cheaply; if it needs to be even faster, it can be done with memory mapped to RAM.    

For permissions, on a cast or something, the host decides who is allowed to access it on creation. This seems silly, however, the idea is that if it's limited permissions, the process would ask first for permission, and it's decided to give or not from there. An example of this you could see is for a compositor, the app would want to get a window, so it would first ask the compositor using a public socket, and in the request, send a pipe for a response. The compositor would then respond with its own Shared Memory, which can be used for the window. Or maybe it just wants to fetch info for the process, so it can hand over caster and give access. 

The actual ID for these will just be a global ID for each IPC type; this is a security risk for a side-channel attack, but the risk isn't huge and is currently just a cost. Possibly in the future, we will do a better approach. You can also argue that it could overflow; however, if you make 1 million per second, it would take you over 580000 years to reach the end, which is unrealistic. I will add overflow testing where it causes kernel panics; however, in practice, this is so large that it will never be reached. 

In the future, I will write a write-up explaining my reasoning for all these choices and go more in depth however this is just an up to date rough overview. 
