> [!WARNING]
> The contents in this page are a very early revision. As of writing this, I have barely coded anything related to processes, and it is still in the planning and structure stage. Most of the content on this page will be replaced and added to at a later date.

# Processes

Processes are where things start to get interesting and where everything starts to fall into place. It's going to be a beast of a writing. This devlog is the first one where I have already thought it is worth doing the write-up beforehand to make it less bad for later, and I haven't even coded a good chunk of it yet. A lot of the stuff here starts depending on each other. To do this cleanly, instead of doing temp fixes, I decided to code a lot of it properly first. It's also worth noting that my thoughts throughout much of this were messy and jumpy. I tried to group by area, but I jumped around a bit because some areas needed more thought. For this reason, I have split the sections while still trying to maintain a rough order.

## Storing Process Data

First off storing processes running, originally my through when I was brand new to this os was to code it with a kernel process ID and global ID system and then convert global ID to kernel ID the reasoning for this was that it allowed me to have one large array of kernel processes greatly simplifying things, since then we now have memory management working so we can do a better way. The idea was that the Global process ID would point to the kernel process. This would limit how many processes can run, but would mean it can be stored in one array much more easily, and the process ID can be counted up, allowing the process ID to keep counting up, lowering process ID collisions (process died and a new one quickly replaces it with the same ID).

I ended up scrapping this idea because there was a much simpler one: radix tables. Originally, I considered this idea but dismissed it because of how many RAM fetches it would require to follow the path; however, it can surprisingly be relatively low-cost if you merge different bit sections into a single address point. So, instead of each RAM fetch having a 0 or a 1 for the 2 next two paths you can take, you store an array of locations you could take, and then you know which to pick in this array based on the value in the section of the key you are reading. 

It did cross my mind to store all the processes as a list of addresses, since that would be fast in the cache, but it would cost way too much. Even though it's fast in the cache, this is a huge amount of data at this scale. For example, with process pointers, up to 65535 processes would mean 524280 bytes in just the index table (524.28 kilobytes). Which, in the much more standard and useful measurement, is 131070 nibbles. This is a huge amount of data that wouldn't fit in cache and would take ages to iterate over. The cost would just be much higher.

I won't go into details on coding the radix table here, since another devlog focuses on that. But the idea was to code a generic function that can be reused. As I was planning it, I could see many uses for it, such as IPC data, file handles, or page table data (not all page tables, only the ones linked to a process or a file cache).

When a process is freed my current idea is that It will just have its data left and marked as dead and can then be overriden however I am not sure if this is better or being able to loop over the radix looking for an empty item is better, likely being able to loop over radix will be better as it also lets there be generic radix function for it so I will end up going for that approch.

## Coding Process Data

To track processes, I set up a system that stores the last assigned process ID. It would then find a new process count up from there and find what the next process after that is free. This skips having to loop over all the past already given process IDs, and also is a more secure approach, as it helps to lower the chance of getting one process that was just killed replaced with another, as a system (either kernel or userspace), more likely userspace tho, could think that a process didn't die and wouldn't notice it just got quickly replaced. Ideally, this doesn't happen and is coded as an assumption, but the best security rule is not one layer but multiple layers of protection, so if one thing fails, you have backups. 

The next thing I wanted to look into was regarding start locations, as most programs aren't placed directly into the start location. If an invalid pointer occurs, it will point to 0x0, triggering an exception and crashing the program, preventing errors from getting out of hand. While looking around for this, I found out from researching that a lot of this info, such as stack location, libraries to load, BSS location, and start location, etc., is not actually decided by the process when it starts, but actually coded into the ELF file format. I could go about skipping this step for now and just getting away with dumping the process data into RAM via VMA; however, I felt doing everything right to start with was better than trying to skip ahead and pay later for a shaky foundation and spend longer swapping everything out, so onto coding an ELF parser.

## ELF parser

I was actually wondering while coding this why even use a ELF parser and from looking into it and reasoning for why it is used, it turns out you can completly get away without one, however ELF allows you to much more simply load all of the data instead of having to mess around loading everything in as the process is running and have the process ask for stuff and figure out locations. ELF is also quite a clean format; it has a lot of room for expansion and encodes all the info you would reasonably need, which is why most operating systems use it, including a fair number of proprietary ones.

When reading ELF data, it likely won't be loaded as a straight line. It will be split into different pages of data. This means that a different approach will have to be taken on this front, where, instead of reading as one continuous whole, we have to read in multiple splits. These will be pages I break up into, since most of the rest of the code will use them. This means that there needs to be a way to convert the relative location to the page location, and then to the location on that page. To achieve this, I choose to use radix tables. A smart trick here is to fetch only the radix table root; depending on the tree's size, you can then decide which level up the tree to pick as the root. Meaning you can do fewer RAM fetches if the data is earlier. This could also use bitwise tricks to determine which page it is without any if statements, leading to better branch prediction. The benefit of this is faster fetching.

Some ELF spesfic information, I choose to hardcode 64bit locations as this OS Is already fairly hard coded for 64bit (will refuse load if not 64bit), choose to ignore handling exenstions as the way risc-v is designed it will just trap when a invalid instruction happens, later can be repalced with a error message on running program warning you and then even more later can use software emulation to make it work after warning you.

## VMA Design

In a process, dynamically loaded libraries will be marked as read-only. If a process attempts to make an edit, it will fire a trap. After this trap is fired, it can be seen that it was attempting to edit a library, so a 2nd copy can be made, which is the library but with editing permissions. The idea is that this 2nd copy wouldn't override the old one, so each process gets its own lib state without loading the lib for every process. This could be expensive each time, but from what I understand and what I've heard, it's fairly rare for a lib to do this, so it's not a huge cost. This is the common approach.

> [!NOTE]
> ### Note About IPC
> Another problem I realised here is that you can't know whether a lib or the process itself is calling a function, and it would be very difficult to determine (can see ways, but they'd be hacky and complex). This means the original IPC system I had in mind, where a lib creates a Caster, for example, wouldn't work, as it would appear as the process using the lib created it. The fix I decided on was that you would still be allowed to create them; however, they would be limited to the libraries you are attached to or to your own library. Then, permissions can determine who can use the library. The ironic part is that I originally planned not to have perms, and now they are a vital part of IPC security. This also comes with the downside of being a very aggressive perm system now, so there would be a lot of perm management. I can see a few other problems with this, like how the kernel handles who can access its Casters and whatnot, but I feel this problem is far enough away that it would be best to leave it for now and revisit it later.

After the elf is passed, there needs to be a way to actually store the data so that, if a page is ready or assigned, you know what info should be stored in that section. To achieve this, I thought it would be best to keep a list of sections for each process. There would also be a map for VMA to load file data pages. The page data referenced wouldn't be the page itself, but a page data struct that stores info like the page number, who has access, etc.

For actually storing this info, I plan to use ranges. One big list with start position and size. And when finding you, loop until you are within range of one of them, then use that info for the section info. This means you can quickly find which section applies to a location. There is an idea for finding in this list of using binary search, which would, in theory, be faster; however, from my knowledge, RAM has a minimum amount of data it can normally collect in one go. This means that, in practice, most fetches from RAM to the CPU, depending on the architecture, are at least 64 bytes. If you fetch in the middle, it's 2 fetches compared to just fetching at the start, where it fetches everything in one go. This means the approach I will take is to just loop from the start to the end, looking for the closest one. Storing the start, end, and location of the section info on the page in one go makes it quick to find which section you are in. Worth noting is that it will be sorted by start address, so an early exit can be taken instead of looping over all of them. A point worth noting here is that sections can overlap in the ELF file.

To store the pages that have actually been mapped to the processors, there will be a radix table. The table will not point to the page itself, but instead to the page's info. The reason for this is that it has to store info about that page, like what it's used for and who's using it. Worth noting, this means there will be 2 different tables for a similar thing, the internal VMA mapping table and my own internal one. However, my system allows for a lot more info to be added and to make it more generic, so it will be used, and the internal arch-specific one will just be updated as info is changed. For example, if a VMA is for a shared library, it will point to a page table entry that flags it as a library and specifies which processes are using it. The idea I came up with is that if the process is killed, it can go to all these pages to see if it no longer has anything using it, and decide whether to clear it out. In terms of how this is mapped, it will be treated as a file cache, but can't be dropped as it is "opened" by some processes. However, this raises an issue if the process edits it. To handle this, I am planning to create a new copy on edit. This new copy will not be a file cache but just RAM data assigned to the process. This means you don't get 2 copies of open process data, which makes it cleaner.

The approach used here with radix also raises the idea of gigapages with page-structure data, which means you could store info like how many pages are stored. This will be left out, but it can be added in the future. A clean way to do it is in the page data structure store how many sequential pages it is, so it can store the start location and how many pages after that it applies to, then just go over each of them to free. I did consider adding to the page allocator, but this would require storing info for each page, like how many pages long it is, and info like that, and would require fetching for each time you free or request a page. This would also have to rely on the allocator, leading to circular dependencies. For this reason, I decided to leave it out for the added complexity and cost for not much benefit. The idea is that the process itself that asks for pages would free the amount they requested themselves. The page data idea discussed earlier is optional, not required, so if the kernel wants a page, it just gets one; it doesn't have to ask for one and then rent it with parms and stuff. This would only be a system for processing pages to explain why they own their page.

As a better fix for this approach, I am thinking of coding another allocator type that supports large multipage assignments, but this will be a feature for later. Likely will later do an "allocator extended" devlog or something along those lines when I do it.

## Back to ELF parser

Back to ELF parser again I found out when making this from how its normally implemented you normally actually don't load the whole ELF into ram and then loop over it, this wasn't what I oringally coded for however does make alot more sense as if you have a huge ELF file with assets embeded in it you don't wanna load all of that if you aren't even gonna use some stuff on loading for example a web browser binary file can be huge you don't wanna load 100s of megabytes in if its not gonna use much of it, the fix to this is lazy loading, bassicly you just only load the parts of the ELF file that you actually end up using.

> [!NOTE]
> If I had to point out the moment for why this really got so complex for coding processes, it would be here with this next thing I say. You could get away without it, but personally, I am a fan of doing things right the first time and not recoding as it gets more complex. I try my best to write stuff well the first time. Obviously, I'm not perfect at it, but it is a general philosophy of mine that sometimes costs me, like here.

To do this with lazy-loading systems, I basically need to implement a way to read data from files. Currently, my file system will just be stored in RAM, which for the time being will make things simpler; however, however in the end with real code this will need to be async as some files might need to talk to the disk before it can be read, I could code a sync api for time being into kernel but you really shouldn't be doing sync stuff in kernel. I should clarify what I mean there: basically, to read and write to disk, it is not as simple as just writing some stuff to RAM. You need to tell the disk to write something, then wait till it fires an interrupt, and then handle that interrupt. This means that for this to be coded well, I have to enable interrupts for kernel space. Wait for a disk interrupt, keep track of it in kernel space, and do not run a program; also, keep track of the program that was running before for response. Finish this disk handle interrupt, go back to the process running in kernel space, use this info, then run the program again. I think it's safe to say that there is quite a bit to do here.

A better way, I thought, to handle this was to make another process system for kernel processes; however, I felt that this would make a lot of stuff more complex to handle. To my surprise, however, when I was looking up how it is handled in most OS, they would just hang the program and keep the process running in kernel space. This is much cleaner; however, it would mean the process is frozen till response is given, but that is likely a cost that will just have to be given here. Basically, when a program asks to run another process, a TRAP will fire. After this, the trap handler will determine what to do and run the kernel code to handle the process; however, before this, it will mark the process as running in kernel space and then enable interrupts. When an interrupt fires, it saves the reg state; everything is the same as normal. However, instead of saving to the process state, it saves to the process kernel state. This means that when disk I/O is complete, it will be able to resume as before. There is some complexity added to this like you can't do anything while having interupts enabled that could cause issues if another processes tried to accses something like you can't set something as free right before doing something such as setting something as free or set atomics and not release them then have another process try to run as schularer decided to switch tasks have it also use atomics then cause issues. Basically, your code has to be in a safe state at all times for interrupts to fire.

There is a problem however I noticed with above idea, bassicly if you have 2 processes running process A does something in kernel space gets interupted then processes B does something in kernel space then switchs back to process A which releases something from stack then process A actually didn't release from process A stack space but Process B, the fix supprisngly to this is have each process have its own stack, this sounds wasteful however It seems as if its one of those things that just unfortunally is wasteful and there is just not much you can do with it, it could be made better by only making pages for a process that needs it or only swithcing when needed however its likely better to just premake and switch early, not currently aware of costs however through as am yet to actually code any of it. From what I have heard, the size of these is kept small, like around 8KB-12KB, which means there is a great risk of stack overflow, so the number of things in scope has to be managed very carefully.

> [!NOTE]
> Another cost to consider is false sharing. I only learned about this later in the development of the system for this process; however, I thought it was worth adding here. Basically, because the same stack would be used, it would read 64bytes for writing a little bit of data, but another core that could then also be working on data in this same stack for another program would then have to tell the kernel to invalidate some of the data as it has changed, causing performance cost as it has to reread data. This would be fixed by stack per core, but likely here, stack per process would work better. Also, this point is basically irrelevant, as the issue mentioned before would also be an issue for multicore, so we couldn't use a single stack either way. 

I did some research on doing a file system api for reading data here. Because of the length, I have split it into another devlog.

## Blocks

Upon further thinking, the information for "blocks", as they were called, which states why a process was blocked, could just be stored as a 64-byte value. The reason is that the amount required to overflow is so ridiculously large that it's basically never going to happen. To do this, I need some way to store which process to unblock. I thought of 2 ways to do this: loop over all processes and mark as free, or store which processes are blocked by the block somehow.

I was thinking of storing this as a hashmap with every block and info about it, but I decided to scrap this as it's really overkill for like nothing, and it's much easier to just store info on what processes are using the block, set the outputs on them and mark as not blocked. This would be handled on each piece itself instead of a generic system, e.g., the filesystem (easier to explain this way, but internally would still be a generic function, just so cleaner)

In the end, I decided to use a radix tree to store block info, such as which processes were blocked, and then just loop over all of them and remove the block from them. I also made sure to note whether the process exists; if it doesn't, ignore it and make sure it is waiting on the same item, as a process could have been killed and another replaced it, which could have led to issues.  

In terms of returning a result there is the idea of having the interupter go to all processes and edit data and the process itself, however this is kinda a really messy idea and would make a very very messy code base, to help avoid this I deiced to split it off, bassicly it will just set a global response id that is used for each process and was set into its value. For now, this will be fine, but having only 1 64bit value response is pretty limiting. In the future, I could possibly expand to per-process 64-bit and allow you to change it so you can do per-process allocation? Will have to see how it ends up being handled. But most cases will be things like file open, which is just a success statement. The fix i landed on for this, which is leaking alittle into what im about to talk about is that for the kernel process space for interupt hanlding it will just handle the response, so like a async file operation can only happen in kernel a user process can never do it so it will just return a direct ram location to file cache then the kernel syscall handler will do wathever like assigning a handler then pass that to the user process which called it. 

#Simple Scheduler

As for storing how long a process has been running, I was considering methods like storing a list of past process times and then averaging them, but most of them have performance or complexity issues. For example, the list needs to be expandable, and every time a process wants to run for all processes, you have to calculate the average by looping over all of them. Or you could cache a value, but there is still a performance cost, just not as severe as having to update the current value. In the end, I decided that exponential decay would be best. The reason I can't just store runtime and divide by that is that if a process takes a bunch at once, it will permanently get less time allocated to it, and one that hasn't yet spiked will get way too much time. It's better to just do a running average kind of deal. 

For storing a list of which program to run, I landed on a red-black tree. I was considering different methods, such as a list, but they had costs, such as needing to shuffle everything for update (linear list) or running out of space (ring buffer). The red-black tree solves all these problems; however, it comes at a cost. However, the cost honestly isn't huge, and it's clearly small enough that it is the approach Linux uses for its scholarly (or did/does? It's a bit weird as it's switched scholars and they do a lot more under the hood than just store runtime). 

Regarding kernel pages for the stack, a common approach is to have a "guard" section that can't be accessed from above or below; if you go beyond it, it's a kernel panic/kill process. A safer way than to make sure manually, you never go over (although you really still should, it's more insurance).

A plan I originally had was to create a generic page data section and store info for each page, like who owns it, access, and whatnot. In the end, I scrapped this and thought it was better to let whoever owns it handle it; it's less complex this way, and it would lead to messy code, since it could have many uses or types of owners. This way, it's handled by whoever, so, for example, if it's a file cache, it would store who has the file open, the last access time, and so on. 

A rough idea for ordering of the Schulader is that it will do this. 
Get trap info such as registers -> look at the current process running and the kernel state -> save the process, check whether to save to the kernel or the process state -> parse and handle the code. 

The idea is that the switch will save the state, then switch to another process and load its state. So, for example, if ELF is being loaded and a filesystem request is made, it might be interrupted, and the state will be saved. From there, another process state is loaded and run. When it makes this request, a block will be placed on it, as discussed before. 

This does, however, raise questions around how to do kernel process syscalls. What about if a request is made in said request? So like a kernel, kernel request, etc. You would have it potentially going up infinitely. Then what about, like, if a response is needed in a lower level or you get circular block loops. This would lead to an insane amount of issues, so I decided to cap it at 1 level of escalation. Basically, interruptable vs non-interruptable. Or kernel space vs process kernel space. 

The idea here is that you will have 2 modes for a trap. It can be handled in kernel space solely, meaning it can't be interrupted and will finish and return to the process, or you could be in user space, where it can be interrupted and will just save state and resume when it gets back to it. The idea is for the kernel process to state that everything done there must at all times be interruptible (if it can't be temporarily disabled, interrupts).  

At this point, I decided, for the time being, to skip the red-black tree and just get things working. Debugging all this stuff at once would be a nightmare, so I am tackling one thing at a time to get it working. This isn't a permanent scrap, just for the time being to get things working. I will likely just do a round-robin type with a list or a circular ring buffer for now. It just adds to the end of the list when it's finished. 

The question raised here is about scrapping the split I had planned for user/kernel process blocks. And just have only one for kernel blocks. However, there are times when this would compromise performance, as it would require more swaps than necessary, so I am planning to leave it in place. 

Not really a clean way to say this, but I changed my mind right afterwards. Most blocks will just be cleaner in kernel space, and the damage is kinda already done by the performance cost of swaps, so it's not really that huge; it is just a lot cleaner to have blocks only in kernel space. 

##  Context Switching

As for the trap, you know nothing about the process running; I will have to code something to get this information into it. My plan here is to store info for each process, and what it is doing, so I can see which process is running. I am planning to do this in a flat array because of false sharing; it will need to be 64 bytes per core, which means a bit of wasted space, but not a huge amount. It will then fetch from each running process, and you will get it from a RAM location indexed by the RAM ID. 

> [!NOTE]
> I didn't quite realise yet that it also doesn't share which core the trap happened on. It was really fun when I learned that, lmao.

The meaning here is that there can be 2 results from a syscall/kernel interaction. It can either drop back down and resume the process or pause execution and switch to another process.
It won't need to worry about kernel async handling, as the process itself will be frozen and will just resume in kernel or user state.

The issue arises of how to actually handle async functions. The logical thought process is to just hang till it gets interrupted with a result; however, the much more logical way to handle it is to yield the async function and place the block. When an interrupt is fired for compliteted it will get resumed, this means you waste as little as possible cpu cycles, techically there is the downside of if something quickly gets finished you waste on another program running and context switch overhead, however this is rare enough and most stuff will be handled smartly, for example fs async api will return if its in cache already and only yeild if its needs loading in. 
> [!NOTE]
> As of being up to here and writing this, I only kind of know how this will look in code, so it is a fair amount just to see when it's coded what it looks like. 

My basic layout goes as follows 
Save the user process state
Mark as kernel process running
allow interrupts

disable interrupts
Mark as user process running


There would also be functions that can hold interrupts, meaning you can temporarily do stuff that can't be interrupted. An example is atomics: you can only have 1 per core, and even if you could have more, you would very likely run into lookups (I hope that is a term, cuz I just made it up lol. Basically just circular dependencies). 

I am thinking of switching things, such as the stack being used, and the state would likely be handled in assembly, as it would be crazy messy, as C reorganises stuff, does some stuff, and changes the state of registers. 

For finding which kernel stack to switch to. I need to locate the kernel stack in assembly and then switch back to the process stack. This will be a juggle of regs as I can't set a value without loading the kernel location into a register. I also need to read data from stack for setting new stack location when go back to process. 

diagram for the trap.

--trap fires
Save reg and data to the stack
pass a pointer to data struct
--enter c code
run trap handler
run scheduler for next process picking
change reg data stored to new process
--exit c
set sp to new process
set reg to data stored
either return to kernel or process

I was thinking here you would need to handle jumping to the location where the user process is stored; however, this isn't actually a concern, and it sets up handles for all of this. This simplifies the plans I had originally in my head. 

The problem here is how to store the stack pointer (SP) when you have to write it somewhere, so when you set the SP, you delete the data stored in SP. It turns out there is an instruction used just for this: scratch, which is only for supervisor use. This means you are able to do the juggling game to get all the info stored down. My thinking here is that this means before the user, you would save to the scratch the stack pointer, and after the user, you would restore from the scratch the stack pointer. 

The idea here is that in the C code you would write, where the next stack pointer will be for the next process, then you don't have to change the stack pointer directly in the C code, which you can't really do. This does, however, increase risk, as sharing the stack means that if you do something big and trigger the stack, it could be on the process stack and overflow because of the minimal amount of space it has. 

The fix to this is to have a core stack, basically a stack per core, which is much larger.

However, I noticed some problems with how to actually get the kernel stack location: you can't use any registers, since they would overwrite the value, so you need to load from a location; however, you can't load from a location, as it would overwrite data. I ended up getting quite stuck here, so I looked at how it is handled in xv6 and found a quite elegant solution. 
https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-riscv/blob/riscv/kernel/trampoline.S  

The way it is handled here is that it would actually use the vma to store a reference to a page where it would put all of the state data. This solved the problem, as it is a constant location and provides both info on current process traps (last saved) and write-to-save trap state info, all without having to do math or load a lot of info. However, we still have to store this location: save a reg to sscratch, use that reg as this stack location, save all info, then use another reg as this stack location, load from scratch, and save that.  

To code this, I will first create a VMA table creator. Then make one for the idle process, and it will allow this whole system to be kick-started much more easily. This also makes it a lot easier to handle things like loading processes for kick-starting, as we start with processes that need idling, which means we can handle other processes much more easily. 
For now, only the trap information needs to be stored. It doesn't really need other pages to be stored at constant locations across processes. 

I was originally planning to make the idle process a single generic process and code it in a way that supported multicore (maybe a special process?). However, on reflection, many split ones would be much better. The reason here is that you don't have to worry about extra code and can just treat it as a normal process without worrying about shared state. Basically, each core will have its own idle process and can switch to it when the scheduler has nothing else to do. 

The plan for structuring all of this is to have an input function in C. This input function will decide whether to branch out and switch the stack to the process or stick with just the kernel runner. Basically asking if it can quickly be done or if it needs to call async stuff. 
This does have a cost here, with another fetch for data and a trip to the kernel, then to the process. However, the alternative is to figure out in assembly if it can be sorted with async or not, which would be very complex and take up a lot more than needed, and be more arch-dependent stuff, so that approach will not be taken. 

## Scraping custom IPC

After looking into it further, I ended up scrapping my custom IPC design. The idea is nice; however, much of the software would need to be ported, and it would take a long time. For instance, I was going to get GCC working, which would take so long to change everything over that it would prevent me from accepting merges from new code. 
For this reason, I decided to go with POSIX or a POSIX-like standard. I also considered doing a compatibility layer, but it's really just a lot of jank and mess, and it would just be better to follow POSIX.  
It really broke down for me what the goal of this project was: to have fun and learn. And spending a stupid amount of time recoding GCC for these little things is not really fun, so I decided to scrap it. 

This also made me consider where I draw the line for my os and the result I came up with is planning to reuse libs like libc or gcc. However, I am recoding everything, such as the composer. I was considering making one compatible with pre-existing programs (like following the Xorg spec), but I decided to scrap that, as it would take a lot of work for the same reason stated before, and I don't really need to, since I'm not planning on running already-made desktop apps.  

A problem I ran into here was with the ASID for processes, which is a number used to cache the process's VMA. Basically, there are only so many, so after a certain point, you have to start reusing them. Very likely, there will be fewer usable than I have, so I can't use PID for it. My thought for fixing this was to keep track of which are in use and to find a free one; if there isn't a free one, find the last/least-used one and replace it with the new one. However, to my surprise, this approach is not taken; instead, they just count up and wipe it all onto the run-over. As a result, the overall cost here is actually lower because, although there is a high upfront cost to wipe it, it is cheaper each time to find the next free. Meaning it's actually both cheaper and easier to implement. It is also one big wipe vs a large amount of small wipes, which is another advantage, as that is cheaper. 

Another problem here is actually finding which process is just trapped. The 2 approchs that came to my mind were as follows.
Keep a list of processes running on each core. Simple fix, but will need to remember to keep 64 bytes per core so it doesn't cause false sharing, which, in a hot loop like this, would be terrible for performance. 
Store at the end of the VMA trapframe, so on the trap, just read what the process is. This allows for quickly seeing which process is running, since it is already stored in the data. 
When picking between these, it's a bit hard to know which is the best idea, as I don't yet know how the schulader will work internally or what will be easy to expose relative to the cost/performance/complexity of exposing. 
> [!NOTE]
> I was also planning to use some other info, for example, core info, since it's 64 bytes, not only to store process info, but also to store other useful info here, like info on the cores they support or their state, etc.

In the end, I decided to look at xv6 again and saw that it stored it in the trapframe. This does seem to expose a risk of corruption, but you should always change the VMA; if you don't, it will cause issues elsewhere, so, really, the corruption risk isn't one. And unlike hart_id, which you need to remember to update, this is a static value that doesn't need to change. 

Another fact I noticed is that it actually preserves info like satp, which makes sense, as it would be quicker to just set that one value, and if any other info is needed, it already stores it. If this changes per arch, it is quick enough to make changes as a struct, and all changes to it are per arch. 
> [!NOTE]
> I scrapped this idea in the end. It was easier to store as a split and just reconstruct. Too much stuff depended on this, and repeatedly splitting and keeping it as arch-dependent code was messier than the performance warranted. 

Another problem worth noting here is that my allocator needs to be 64-byte aligned, as the headers currently offset it, as does the start of page info, which both cause issues and prevent it from being 64-byte aligned. The reason for this is false sharing in SMP, which causes performance implications when data is shared between cores. 

I decided to go back over the code here and shorten variable names, as they made a lot more sense that way. Like, instead of virtual_memory_allocator, just vma or pointer be ptr. As if you are programming an operating system and looking at kernel code, you likely have enough understanding of these terms to make them make sense and feel like 2nd nature. 
 
A wonder I did have here was for SMP how we are going to handle fetching pages when pager requires a atomic lock but wahtever calling it might also need a atomic lock, the answer to this is normally you will remake a list of pages, the idea being you can use these remade when calling it so you don't have to do 2 atomic locks which can't be done. This is again an area for SMP when added. 

For the locks themselves, you normally do ipi (inter-process-interrupt) where you interrupt another core when what it is waiting on has finished, but in practice here, the release will be quick; the scale of this os is small enough that it's safe to just do a wait loop instead, even if not as efficient.  The true times when this would have a huge cost are for things like IO, but for this, I'm just planning to switch processes, so it's fine. 

For process data, I decided to just do a pointer in the trap frame, as any more info would get messy. When more info is needed, you can just do a RAM fetch using the process pointer stored in the trap frame. It may sound like a performance cost, but in practice, this data is small enough and going to be fetched so much that it will almost certainly end up in L1 cache. 

Another thing I was thinking about here is the performance cost of passing function parameters, and whether, past a certain number of arguments, it would stop using registers? The answer to this was pretty much every arch had at least 8, so if you are doing past a certain point, it does have cost, but it's pretty high (if you are doing >8 args, the issue here shouldn't be performance lol). Interestingly, appropriately, Windows limits it to 4, as earlier on with the compiler, they decided to limit it to make it easier to program and reason about. I was also thinking about passing values vs structs, and in the end, it's honestly not as high a cost as you might think, since compilers are pretty good at optimising and cache levels would likely help a lot. For example, if you reference a struct value a lot, the C compiler will automatically put it into a register or put the data onto the stack without you doing anything about it. 

Regarding the kernel stack locations, I decided to put them right at the end of the kernel. This means you look directly at the end of the kernel location (which is static) and then do some math with the hart ID to get the kernel stack location. This much simplifies getting where to put the stack when you are handling a trap.

I've also realised that the approach I am currently using for the DTB parser is slow to iterate on and is an O(n^2) relationship. If you want to get all children, you have to loop over everything to find all with that same prefix, which would take a long time. A much better way is to have pointers to children. This is an area to revisit, and I should be able to do it much better now that I've gained more experience programming in C. There are annoying issues here, like how this structure works best with an allocator for child sizes and whatnot. However, we don't actually have an allocator, as this is before all this. I'll likely make a prefetcher to fetch sizes, then a separate program that loops over and cleans up everything.

A possible issue here worth noting quickly is that hart_id could not be ordered. I added a panic message to handle for this; however, in practice, the fix most likely here would be some sort of reference system for actual hardware stuff that says the heart in question, and all my software would use its own internal system, again, not worth worrying about, cuz thats into SMP territory. 

From here on out, there were a lot of little wiring up and big decisions. If you're really curious, read the commits lol. Or shoot me a message. 

An issue I ran into was that after the VMA change, when it tried to write data for the process, it seemed to crash (hang, stopped doing anything). This made me think that something about the change was leading to it having this issue. Possibly not setting it right? Or a missing fence? I used GDB here to examine the vma table and confirmed that my code was setting everything correctly. It also must not have broken it too badly, as the code after it ran fine. This told me that the upper half was working, so it must be the correct code. And if I made a change to the upper-half setting code, everything broke, meaning it was using it. 

A hunch that I had here with fixing this was that it showed the wrong data for VMA. A useful bug I had to fix was that I used the qemu debug command, which prints all the traps that happen. This is a command that I would have hoped to have seen earlier, as it helped me to find what I was looking for. The output of this can be seen as 'riscv_cpu_do_interrupt: hart:0, async:0, cause:000000000000000f, epc:0xffffffc080202e4c, tval:0x00000003fffff000, desc=store_page_fault'. 

This page fault error message confirms what I was thinking. And an issue I did notice here was that the address was actually missing an F and was off from what it should be. However, this didn't fix the issue, just moved it to the correct location. In the end, the issue ended up being that in the virtual memory allocation, I removed the VMA kernel start location offset twice, so it was moving from kernel space to physical RAM location twice, meaning it had the wrong location.

Now, there was a new issue that I was getting an invalid instruction error message, and this location was right where I set my idle process to be. Changing the start location for the idle process and where it was placing its instructions moved the location as well. I had a hunch here that it was writing the wrong instructions somehow. I confirmed this by printing out the assigned instructions, and I noticed that it was all blank where there should have been code for the idle process. I had a feeling this was to do with the linker sharing the wrong location. To do this, I ran the command  ‘riscv64-unknown-elf-nm build/kernel.elf | grep "idle"'. This gave me the following output. 

0000000000002d60 T idle_process_entry
000000000000c000 B _kernel_idle_process

It can be seen from this that the locations expected are not the same. However, they should be set to the location of idle_process_entry, which is the assembly start, at the start of the _kernel_idle_process assembly section. I fixed this bug by changing the linker to remove the *(text*) section, since it was set to include everything related to text, which wasn't needed and broke the idle process code. This also likely would have been a bug with my trap, but my trap used the entry location, so the issue wouldn't have been seen. 

From here, I set up a temp syscall system (won't get into here), and it can be seen that the system was outputting commands from the idle process. This means that our first process is running. That being an idle process. 

We now have idle processes working. Because of how long this has gotten already, I will leave the rest to follow-up devlogs. 
