# Radix

## Processes

This thinking is mainly for the process side; however, the same rules apply, and apply most of the time, when radix trees are used.

For picking the size, I originally was thinking a byte per table. As fewer fetches are better, and it would only be 2 fetches on a likely 16-bit size, I was planning. However, this results in 2048 bytes per table, which is a large amount. The better amount I ended up going for is a nibble per page, which is 4 bits. This lands at 128 bytes per page, which is much better, but it requires more fetches to retrieve the data. However, if there are fewer processes or processes are more spread out, it is less wasteful. I will admit the numbers here aren't completely my own; however, I do agree with the end conclusion. 

For the time being, when a table is free and there are no processes on any of its leaves, it will be left alone. However, in future, it will be trimmed. I am not entirely sure how to do this without degrading performance, as there is an advantage to having it ready when other processes are slotted in place. So for the time being, it will be left and possibly revisited later. An idea I had was to store the number of children. But this does raise issues with that one extra, placing it in another allocator size bracket and resulting in a large amount of wasted space. It would also be another value to edit and place, which could lead to an error.

## Coding

Coding the rafix actually went surprisingly easy; however, I did have some issues with it, which I will point out.

The first issue was reading the key in the wrong order. I wanted LSB to be child leaves, as this means the least change as you count up and would jump around less. I originally coded this wrong.

### Allocator Bug

To be completely honest, my notes here aren't the best, so I may get the ordering a little wrong.

I noticed a bug that every now and again, a value in the tree would print out a massive value. My first thought was to blame my pager or allocator, as I looked at my tree code and saw nothing wrong with it. An interesting part of this is that it only happened in massive radix trees; the code was fine in small ones, which also pointed me towards this.

My next course of action was to print out the page and the allocator when an issue was given, looking for the issue. This would help me find out what was causing the issue. I also had it print the allocator address and the page address. I noticed that it would suddenly jump to allocating very tiny allocator addresses, after which the kernel would panic. I also noticed that this bad address would not be the first address on the tree, but rather a bottom-leaf item with a bad value set for it. My thought here is some form of corruption of the allocator, or it is going back on itself, but that would be weird, as nothing has been realised yet. It did raise a bug I didn't think of as well but was unrealted bassicly I am assuming all values are blank in the radix that you get from allocator however they aren't actually generntiued to be blank as allocator just handles addresses, this means something could have jump data and as radix tree uses 0 as confirm is blank it wouldn't be blank and would think its an address, I fixed this issue but it wasn't this. Also, nothing has been freed yet, so it couldn't be this. 

Because of this, my next thought was to print out the distance between each of the allocated addresses, and I noticed 2 things very quickly.
1. The allocated addresses were all jumping at 1088, which is nearly 10x what is expected, as a jump of 128 bytes. 
2. Sometimes the jump would be massive at 18446744073709524160 bytes. This aligned with the new page, but didn't explain why this number was so big, as it could be negative, meaning it is actually going backwards, which the size of it suggests could be true. But again, as before, nothing has been freed yet, so that doesn't explain this.

Turns out in the end, the issue was that when it was setting the location for returning, it was using pointer arithmetic instead of adding the location to the data itself.

Another issue (honestly can't remeber if it was before after or same issue) that I found was that the code wasn't actually using the index entry locations when the index overflows to a 2nd index page, I figured this out by looking at the header data and found out that it would print out correct headers for all the data it was reading then suddently right as it would go onto a another index page there was no header. I found this out by looking at the global ID beforehand and doing the math to determine which index page it would land on. 

