# Syscall

To best organise the syscalls, I decided to put everything syscall-related into its own syscalls folder. All syscalls will be called by their own functions, namely the sync and async versions. I decided to pass the kernel trap data struct for info, and I added a return value for returning information. I also set a limit of 4 args for input, since in some cases you need more, but 99% of the time you won't, and for those edge cases, you can load from RAM. There is actually a performance cost to always preloading these args and returning an arg; however, it is much, much cleaner here than doing a bunch of per-arch stuff, so I chose to leave it. 

I also had an issue with going to the next operation; basically, without iterating on which pc was running, you would probably keep running the syscall. I solved this by making an arch-specific skip instruction. I was worried I would have to read the instruction data from userspace to know what to skip, since RISC-V instructions can vary in size, which would be expensive; however, in practice, the ecall instruction is always the same length of 4 bytes, meaning I can just iterate by 4 bytes after handling.

An interesting bug I ran into here was that, for the stack address passing from the kernel handler to the async kernel process handler, it would run an if-more-than-zero operator. I assumed this operator would use unsigned values; however, my trap handler output an unsigned stack handler address, and then it performed a signed greater-than-zero operator, which always returned less than zero because the kernel is in the upper half. Fairly easy fix, which was just if not equal to zero, which is exactly the same, but an interesting bug. 

## Init System

A bit unrelated, but to kick off the operating system, I am planning to create an init process whose sole goal is to load everything the system needs to start. This process would essentially just load another init file into your file system; from there, that init file would handle everything. The reason for this is i am planning to code this whole init process in straght assembly and as this is arch spesfic i want to make as small as possible, the reason for this is I dont want this to use a ELF parser as it would become a nightmare to handle async and sync and everything when its not even a process and get way to messy, this approch is much more clean and easy todo. 

## Scheduler

For the scheduler, I decided to code it around explicit rather than implicit mentions. Basically, a process has to be explicitly mentioned and can't just be known; in other words, the scheduler keeps track only of running, usable processes and doesn't keep track of running or blocked processes. When a process frees up, it will be added back into the scheduler. The reason here is that this increases performance. It also simplifies, as you only worry about what is relevant, not whether something applies or can be used. 

For the scheduler, this means you only need to add and remove items; you don't need to worry about item states. So all that needs to happen is to have a get-lowest-item operator and an add-item operator. You don't need to store blocked. Later in development, it will actually get the lowest item, like best to run. For now, it's just the first added item. (first in, first out). 

I also decided to split the context switch out to its own thing, using its own file and whatnot. I was thinking of putting it in Schuldaer; however, I felt it was best to split it. I'm not completely happy with either way; they both feel messy, but I felt this was a slightly better approach. 

Also worth talking about here, but for BSS data, I decided that everything that is read-only, so set once, is fine to store. But data that changes must be stored in 64-byte-aligned, 64-byte-sized chunks, as this will prevent false sharing with other data. 

I spent a fair amount of time considering whether the scheduler should store the process ID or a pointer to the process. I landed on storing a pointer to the process. As I felt you would need a lot more info on the process later, I thought it would be quicker. My original thought was the opposite; however, I changed it to this way when it was causing a lot of process fetches, as almost always, you need something other than the process ID afterwards.  

Regarding stopping a process, I decided to use process_id because it handles the case where a process has already been killed better and is less likely to cause issues. There are a lot of issues here around whether you kill a process that is already dead. I'm not really sure how to fix a lot of them. For now, I will make it an operation that requires no interrupts (will with SMP need an atomic lock) 

## Back to syscalls

When printing out the data for syscalls, I noticed this. Each process is errror, process id, then args

process error: unknown syscall 
0000000000000001
0000000000000069
0000000000000000
0000000000000000
0000000000000000
process error: unknown syscall 
0000000000000000
0000000000000069
0000000000000000
0000000000000068
0000000000000000

I saw that the value of 0x69 (105 decimal) was output on both of them. This is weird, as I only set it in my init process, but the idle process also had the output. This makes me think it's incorrectly sharing the data, so the context switches must not be working correctly. I also noticed, as a fun side effect, that the outputs seem to change each time. 

The weird part I noticed is that it didn't seem to affect any of the other regs. I also realised that this first reg is also used as the output arg for when a syscall finishes. In the end, the issue was that after a process is killed, it will switch to the next process, and right before leaving the trap, it will set the output arg to the previous output, which led to this issue. 

### Page Faults

When reading data from userspace, you could encounter a page fault if the data is in an invalid location or hasn't been loaded yet. The naive fix to this is to just crash the process and make sure this doesn't happen. However, this doesn't really happen, as even if you manually reread the data to make sure it is loaded (which is a bad idea as the kernel should transparently handle all this), then you could still be unlucky and right before the syscall or during the syscall have the page get unloaded and then attempt to access the data and get a page fault, so crash happens. This means we need to handle a page fault while already handling a trap. So a double trap, essentially, and both will need to be async versions, as they both need to wait for things to work. 

There is the idea of getting the real page location from vma instead of reading directly; however, this adds a lot of overhead per read and is a bad idea when it can just be read directly from userspace. 

Regarding the reason for how to code this and whether I was on the right track, I asked for help and was told that the method was correct, along with ideas on how to code it, which I was stuck on. Basically, you want to write a function in assembly and attempt to call it; the function would return whether it succeeds or fails. You would then, on page fault, know that the process trap was running, so jump to where the stack pointer was before and run the async page fault trap handler function. You would then, in the trap fault handler, see that it was trying to read userspace, and you would output 1 if it failed to read, or 0 otherwise. This means that the function you called before will be able to see this response when you drop back down. 

To help me understand these, I was shown example code. If you are still unsure, it may help you too.
https://github.com/managarm/managarm/blob/master/kernel/thor/arch/riscv/stubs.S
https://github.com/managarm/managarm/blob/master/kernel/thor/generic/hel.cpp#L53
https://github.com/managarm/managarm/blob/master/kernel/thor/arch/riscv/user-access.S#L26

The way I fixed this was by coding it to keep track of the state a process was in, so it could tell whether the process was running in userspace, in a trap, or in a page fault for a trap. Then, using this, I could determine the stack pointer's location and which trap was intended to occur. I also added handling so that if a state was not as expected or it double-trapped, it can kernel panic. This had the nice side effect of handling kernel errors that could otherwise have gone unnoticed, leading to corruption. There is a performance cost around setting this data; however, I felt the cost was worth it for simplicity and the added security of this approach.  

After coding all this, an error that I spent ages trying to debug was around it, always page-faulting when reading userspace data. After looking over my code for a long time, I found out it was because my init page was marked as execute-only lol. This meant I couldn't read any data from it. There is a bypass for this in the kernel, which I considered; however, there are attack and exploit windows, and this is a hacky workaround, so I just changed the page for the process itself to read and execute. An example of an attack is if you have mapped the screen, for example, in RAM as read-only, but you ask the kernel to write something there through a syscall, the kernel would do it fine. Or you may have a write-only area for something, then you ask the kernel to read it, and it reads it fine. 

# Allocator

Since it was going to be needed pretty soon, I quickly fixed my allocator bug and aligned it to 64 bytes for all data. Basically, I made the header 64 bytes long so everything would be aligned. Then, for each piece of data, I removed the header and made it just right there. It could get the number from the list by checking how far the header is from the top. I was expecting a lot of issues, but it was easier to recode than I expected. 

# Misunderstanding around tp and sp

I learned here that tp is actually a per-thread stack. This didn't make sense to me, as I assumed a different VMA, so I wasn't sure why; however, I later learned that threads all share the same VMA, meaning they have more than 1 stack used at different locations, each for its own process. The reason why threads are fast is that they share the same VMA, and it's a little cost to switch between them.
