> [!WARNING]
> Content in this page is a work in progress. As I write this code, it will be updated and replaced as I go.

# The Problem
During the development of my DTB parser, I ran into a problem. I needed a place to store the data. Putting it into a stack would cause it to be deleted, and it is too large to return from a function easily. The solution was fairly self-explanatory: I needed a way to identify safe locations to place pointers so I could write data to them. In normal C, using the std lib, this is malloc if i am not mistaken (could be incorrect as i have never used C std as this is my first time using C lol). The solution to this was a simpleish fix: I just put the data into the next available RAM location; however, this fix is a one-time thing, and a much better system will need to be coded in order for the os to use. The first thing I thought of is that this data will need to be shared between the user processes and the kernel. This means it will need a way to split the data, which is called a pager.   
  
My thought process for this stage is that I should most likely set up a pager system, since trying to figure out which data is kernel vs user and having different systems using RAM would likely cause more issues, and it would be much easier to just reserve the space. Another benefit is that I would have pages all aligned to the page size, greatly simplifying everything.  

# Pager
For the pager, my thought process followed a similar approach to the buffer with defragmentation in my past project (https://github.com/Ai-Kiwi/ai-kiwi-devlog/blob/main/voxelith/19-4-2026%20-%20Overview.md). Basically, I would store free ranges where buffers could be used. This would allow finding the next slot in O(1) time. Another advantage is that it would handle it basically for free if memory locations were not all in a row and there were unusable blank areas. However, as the number of free spots changes, the list would change too, and this would quickly become messy. If you have too many free ranges, you may need to move pages around to make room for storing a larger array, which would be very messy.  
  
My next idea was a simpler approach: I would store a list for each possible page location as a straight list, and each page would be a bit for if in use. This sounds like a bad idea; however, in practice, this would be a lot better than it sounds. The ram usage would be surprisingly low, as with the planned 4096B (4KB) page sizes, it would lead to, for a reasonable 4GB or 8GB system, ram usage in single-digit megabytes for this "free page list". Another advantage is that when you want to fetch which pages are free, the whole list can fit in the CPU cache, meaning it would be fairly fast, and, as it's continuous, it could also be easily predicted ahead of time by the CPU. The locations could also be stored as 64-bit values, meaning that in almost 1 CPU cycle, you can test 64 different page locations. 
> [!NOTE]
> Possible optimisations later as well can be added, such as jumping to the next available free slot by storing the first free slot, so if a large chunk is already used, it can skip that. Could have this value updated on the page released if it is smaller than the page released's location.  

I can as thinking this see possible problems with multicore processing. The plan is to kinda avoid most of these and come back to it when I plan on implementing it.   
  
Something else worth considering here as well is putting the kernel pages at the end of the page list. The reason is that this area can be marked as kernel data in the pager, so that if an attack attempts to read it, it can't, since it's not user RAM. This acts as another defence layer to help security.  
> [!CAUTION]
> Depending on the approach for this and the CPU used, this can also make you susceptible to a meltdown attack. The CPUs this operating system targets are too new to be susceptible to meltdown, so this will be left unfixed. However, in a real operating system, you would want to test whether it is susceptible, and if so, automatically switch the page context to a custom one set up for kernel allocation on trap running so that the user process can't access kernel data via prefetch.  
  
Something else with this planned approach, as mentioned briefly before, is the idea of areas of memory we can't use. This does pose a problem for this approach. A possible way to fix this is to premark these areas as already used in the bitmap. However, although this works for a short break, it can be very wasteful and use a lot of RAM for a long, unusable area. This could be a large amount; on RISC-V, this can only be up to 512 GB. However, as this OS may later support other architectures, it should be coded in a way that makes it easy to support others. To fix this, there needs to be a way to store different bitmaps and ranges. The approach I came up with is as follows. First, it will store the number of locations, then it will store the data for each location. Each location will store the count, then the bitmap location, then the pages location.
> [!TIP]
> layout to help understanding. All values are 64-bit.   
> [amount of locations][page list 1 count][page list 1 bitmap location][page list 1 page start location][page list 2 count][page list 2 bitmap location][page list 2 page start location][page list 3 count][page list 3 bitmap location][page list 3 page start location]---(other data)---[page list 1 bitmap]-(4096 alignment)-[page list 1 pages]---(other data)---[page list 2 bitmap]-(4096 alignment)-[page list 2 pages]---(other data)---[page list 3 bitmap]-(4096 alignment)-[page list 3 pages]

## Coding it
I finished programming this. I haven't got around to filling in info on what I ran into while coding it. 

# Virtual Memory System
I'd like to start by correcting myself. While reading the specifics of how RISC-V implements virtual memory tables, I learned that it has a flag that allows a section to be accessed only by the supervisor. I was curious about the reason and discovered that my model was wrong.      
Previously, my understanding was that when syscall ran, it would raise to the supervisor level and then would disable the table mapping. This is incorrect; I found that, typically, people design with it so that it actually keeps the table mapping and access kernel code using it. This is done by mapping kernel data to a location, such as the 2nd half of the process's virtual memory. The reasoning is that switching tables is expensive and requires a TLB flush, which makes it even more expensive. This is also how meltdown really works, it's a process of getting cpu to prefetch from this kernel area using predictive pipeline and then looking at how hot cpu data is by reply latency (if its in cache or not) as the data of kernel is in process's virtual memory, the reaosn why on older cpu its expesnive to fix its because it requires switching table to stop this happening.

> [!NOTE]
The regions the kernel occupies are marked as kernel-only, meaning they cause a page fault if accessed from a user process. 

Arguably, you could do it the way I originally planned, but, as mentioned before, it would be much slower due to table switching and TLB flushing. 

However, I did notice a problem with this. The kernel currently loads everything in at the process start location. If you then tried to use data here, like the pointers, after a userspace process starts, they would point to completely wrong locations, causing incorrect data to be read and written. The obvious fix I first thought of for this was, of course, moving everything over, pointer by pointer. However, there is actually an easier fix to this. What if instead of moving everything, we started with everything moved? The "cheat" here is that we, in the bootloader before C loads, set up a table map for the kernel with the kernel data in the 2nd half, load it into that table map, and then start the kernel using that table map. We can then change the linker to be offset. This does raise an issue, however. Locations such as UART would be in the wrong place. The solution I thought of was to instead just add the offset for each of these; this is messy, but most likely the best fix. The same idea would apply to DTB addresses as well.   
Surprisingly, this same approach is used in Linux itself, confirming to me that there is some amount of sense to this approach: https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S

Another thing to note is that, when I was researching whether they start locations at 0 or not, as I thought they might not because of reasons like the ELF format, possibly or something. They, in fact, leave a gap at the start, whose purpose is to cause null pointers to crash the system. This is a good idea, and the same thing will be done here.  

In terms of actual implementation, I thought it was best to code most of this as arch-specific. The reason for this is that, although RISC-V, SV39 works perfectly for this use case, as each table is exactly the size of a page. Other archs may use different formats that work differently, such as table pointers, depth count, permissions, and size of allocations themselves. This means that, because of the significant differences per arch, I decided to just follow the previously used approach of a generic function type across different arches. I should also mention that the pointer offsets for things like UART will also be passed. 

Another point worth noting is that tables also serve another purpose: they enable efficient data sharing between processes. You can have multiple processes with the same RAM location pointer, meaning different processes can share data. This is very useful for use cases such as a framebuffer. Where a syscall can request the framebuffer and where it would like it, and then that location can be mapped. This is also another thing to note with things such as framebuffer that is passed to userspace, is that you don't want kernel data to go into any "padding area" that each of these has if they don't take up the full 4096 bytes for a page, as that will also be passed to the user. The solution I thought of for this is to align your pages to 4096 bytes. This raises a problem with the original approach I used when coding the pager. Although I made sure the pages were aligned, I didn't make the bitmaps aligned, which means that in rare cases where space is free after, say, a framebuffer, it would try to write there, potentially causing issues in user space. The fix is to ensure that the locations for bitmap data are also aligned to 4096.  
