> [!WARNING]
> Content in this page is a work in progress. As I write this code, it will be updated and replaced as I go.

# Virtual Memory System
I'd like to start by correcting myself. While reading the specifics of how RISC-V implements virtual memory tables, I learned that it has a flag that allows a section to be accessed only by the supervisor. I was curious about the reason and discovered that my model was wrong.      
Previously, my understanding was that when syscall ran, it would raise to the supervisor level and then would disable the table mapping. This is incorrect; I found that, typically, people design with it so that it actually keeps the table mapping and access kernel code using it. This is done by mapping kernel data to a location, such as the 2nd half of the process's virtual memory. The reasoning is that switching tables is expensive and requires a TLB flush, which makes it even more expensive. This is also how meltdown really works, it's a process of getting cpu to prefetch from this kernel area using predictive pipeline and then looking at how hot cpu data is by reply latency (if its in cache or not) as the data of kernel is in process's virtual memory, the reaosn why on older cpu its expesnive to fix its because it requires switching table to stop this happening.

> [!NOTE]
The regions the kernel occupies are marked as kernel-only, meaning they cause a page fault if accessed from a user process. 

Arguably, you could do it the way I originally planned, but, as mentioned before, it would be much slower due to table switching and TLB flushing. 

However, I did notice a problem with this. The kernel currently loads everything in at the process start location. If you then tried to use data here, like the pointers, after a userspace process starts, they would point to completely wrong locations, causing incorrect data to be read and written. The obvious fix I first thought of for this was, of course, moving everything over, pointer by pointer. However, there is actually an easier fix to this. What if instead of moving everything, we started with everything moved? The "cheat" here is that we, in the bootloader before C loads, set up a table map for the kernel with the kernel data in the 2nd half, load it into that table map, and then start the kernel using that table map. We can then change the linker to be offset. This does raise an issue, however. Locations such as UART would be in the wrong place. The solution I thought of was to instead just add the offset for each of these; this is messy, but most likely the best fix. The same idea would apply to DTB addresses as well.   
Surprisingly, this same approach is used in Linux itself, confirming to me that there is some amount of sense to this approach: https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S

Another thing to note is that, when I was researching whether they start locations at 0 or not, as I thought they might not because of reasons like the ELF format, possibly or something. They, in fact, leave a gap at the start, whose purpose is to cause null pointers to crash the system. This is a good idea, and the same thing will be done here.  

In terms of actual implementation, I thought it was best to code most of this as arch-specific. The reason for this is that, although RISC-V, SV39 works perfectly for this use case, as each table is exactly the size of a page. Other archs may use different formats that work differently, such as table pointers, depth count, permissions, and size of allocations themselves. This means that, because of the significant differences per arch, I decided to just follow the previously used approach of a generic function type across different arches. I should also mention that the pointer offsets for things like UART will also be passed. 

Another point worth noting is that tables also serve another purpose: they enable efficient data sharing between processes. You can have multiple processes with the same RAM location pointer, meaning different processes can share data. This is very useful for use cases such as a framebuffer. Where a syscall can request the framebuffer and where it would like it, and then that location can be mapped. This is also another thing to note with things such as framebuffer that is passed to userspace, is that you don't want kernel data to go into any "padding area" that each of these has if they don't take up the full 4096 bytes for a page, as that will also be passed to the user. The solution I thought of for this is to align your pages to 4096 bytes. This raises a problem with the original approach I used when coding the pager. Although I made sure the pages were aligned, I didn't make the bitmaps aligned, which means that in rare cases where space is free after, say, a framebuffer, it would try to write there, potentially causing issues in user space. The fix is to ensure that the locations for bitmap data are also aligned to 4096.  

In terms of coding this, I figured I would need a location to store the map for the top half data to kernel data, and this will need to happen in assembly. I thought the cleanest way was likely to just put it right after the program in RAM, then send the leftover start location to the kernel when it starts. 

Similar to before, there is again a cheat, which I found out about while researching how this is actually implemented: the whole thing can more or less be done on one page, since the top 256 locations can all be huge pages instead of normal, smaller ones. However, from what I have heard, this does actually have a downside, unlike previous cheats. The downside is that if the kernel tries to run code in data locations or to save code in a location for running, both will succeed. The normal approach to stop this is to use certain pages as read-only and others as non-executable; however, this can't be done when all are large, gigabyte-sized pages. For now, I have decided to use gigabyte pages with the plan to revisit this later, as the effort to change it shouldn't be huge.
