#Row hammer attack

One interesting thing I learned here is a row hammer attack. Basically, when you perform a large number of reads or writes, it can cause voltage to leak to adjacent data stored in RAM. This could potentially lead to a user process corrupting the state of nearby processes. Basically, you could do an attack where you land a page next to another process's important page, say, where it stores api server, you could potentially do a large amount of reads and writes to try to corrupt it to your value. There are some mitigations to this, like moving process pages to different locations in RAM so they're on different banks, but none end up being really practical. DRR4 mid-generation actually started introducing matches to this; however, they were easily circumvented. DRR5 properly fixed these issues, however. This sounds like drr4 has a massive security issue left, but in practice, you need so much time, luck, and to know a huge amount about the exact hardware to get the info needed to do anything useful. You can't really exploit it. Google showed an example attack in the past, but it took a lot of knowledge about hardware and provided not much. 

# Out of order preforming mulitplue operations

A fun, unrelated thing I learned here is that without an out-of-order vs an in-order CPU, they can run multiple instructions at the same time. And you can actually give instructions in a way that best accounts for that. As different units in it only have so many output units. For example, if you were going to do 2 different instructions that don't depend on each other, you could move them to instead be a time and a bitwise shift, and this would actually allow both to run at the same time, as the ALU and bitwise unit might not share a unit. In practice, compilers are so good that they account for this, but it's an interesting thing to learn either way. In theory, you could also optimise by the actual instructions themselves, in order of execution; however, in practice, the CPU looks so far ahead that it is able to intelligently reorganise instructions, so really the main way to benefit is instructions that all depend on each other, so it can't shift around run order. 
